Phase 02 fixture integration evidence
Date: 2026-10-09
Status: Completed for the explicitly authorized Debian 13 arm64 fixture host.
Scope: P02-06 and the remaining runtime portions of P02-07. This is adapter
integration, not a production deployment endpoint or Phase 03 apply engine.

Execution boundary
------------------
The integration package requires linux + pi_integration and an explicit
-fixture-stage. Ordinary tests skip hardware execution; normal CLI builds do
not contain these stages. The release dispatcher still permits only ping and
inventory. The test executable ran as the existing unprivileged enrolled
runner, using account-derived home, runtime directory and user bus, an
accessible working directory, typed adapter arguments and bounded deadlines.
Operator access only installed/removed the test executable, performed the two
authorized reboots and removed the fixture's generated TLS certificate files.
No account removal, SSH configuration change, package installation, tailnet,
DNS, firewall, VPS or unrelated-service change was performed by this lane.
The existing enrollment, linger, release binary and package-default site remain.

Important planner exception: fixture-only route projection
---------------------------------------------------------
Real inventory observes the packaged default HTTP site as an unowned catch-all.
The real planner correctly refuses this input with exactly domain_owned. The
harness asserts that refusal, then passes a fixture-only snapshot projection
with an empty LiveCaddyFiles observation to the pure planner. This is not a
conflict-free connected-apply plan. Production ownership checks were not
weakened, and this projection must NEVER be used by connected apply. Whole-root
Caddy validation still includes the untouched packaged site and its exact
original main-file bytes. The separately scoped local fixture route is the
only added route. Phase 03 must resolve ownership explicitly or refuse.

Pins and exact versions
-----------------------
Go toolchain: go1.27.2; existing go.mod dependency pins unchanged.
Image: docker.io/nginxinc/nginx-unprivileged
Index digest:
 sha256:7377697a821c131a924a7105fafbe7414db4e9fcc77a6f08f776f33f141ec3f8
Selected linux/arm64 manifest:
 sha256:e00b7e2763a0dfec9ec6d99253612510c253df47d7218cdd35c4e465b4e9ad1f
Both were checked by the real Podman pull/inspect adapters. No mutable tag was
used in the fixture spec or unit. The known plan.Image.ManifestDigest value was
passed directly to quadlet.Render. A different manifest now fails rendering
when the plan records a known digest; its regression test failed before the fix.

Installed package revisions, queried directly after final cleanup:
 caddy             2.6.2-12+deb13u1
 conmon            2.1.12-4
 crun              1.21-1
 dbus-user-session 1.16.2-2
 passt             0.0~git20250503.587980c-2+deb13u1
 podman            5.4.2+ds1-2+b2
 systemd           257.13-1~deb13u1
 uidmap            1:4.17.4-2
Second-reboot arm64 test executable SHA-256:
 4a2275bd3a77d86ef6c8689087212ce4950079224e8770851f2b227696b6d9d7
Final binding-check executable SHA-256:
 9e390f611a3e935d8bed79ed085b1c4b153715090958c44cf1ab3e1a84dee125
Each remote copy matched before its removal.

Real adapter path
-----------------
Spec parsing and policy normalization allocate one nonprivileged loopback host
port and container port, memory/PID limits and one immutable Podman secret
binding. The secret has public fixture-only bytes, travels through adapter
stdin and is verified inside the running container without logging its value.
Ordinary environment text containing quote, slash, percent, dollar and Unicode
characters also round-trips through the executed generated unit.

Quadlet renders from the typed desired input and recorded plan. The stateless
installer validates an isolated candidate with the real user generator, then
atomically installs it. The generator seam is test-only: it adds the fixed
QUADLET_UNIT_DIRS override needed for isolated validation, without expanding
the release subprocess environment allowlist. The real user-manager adapter
reloads and starts the generated service. No shell-generated unit is used.

Caddy stages, validates and adapts the complete candidate root, publishes a
checked generation and calls the real systemd reload adapter through the
existing reload-only polkit rule. Direct and routed probes require HTTP 200
and the expected image welcome body. The harness polls for at most 45 seconds,
with two-second requests, one-second dials and a bounded response body. The
reserved local fixture name is explicitly dialed on loopback. Fixture HTTPS
certificate verification is disabled only in this test client: this is not
public ACME, public DNS or publicly trusted TLS evidence.

Before each isolation probe, host-side Caddy admin access succeeds. Container
requests to admin then fail through container loopback and both generated
host aliases. This positive control avoids a vacuous denial test.

Live inventory discovered the actual renderer-owned, unprefixed unit. A narrow
Podman inspect observation verifies a running container, its generated-service
label and exactly one loopback TCP binding before returning a known live port.
Stopped/malformed/wrong-label/multiple-port/off-loopback cases remain unknown.
Markers and runtime observations do not confer replacement authority. The
unit-discovery and port regression tests first failed, then passed after the
collector fix. Image identity in generic inventory remains unknown.

Failure drills
--------------
1. A real invalid candidate fails validation before activation. Prior disk
   hashes and the healthy served route remain unchanged.
2. The test seam inserts an invalid directive only into the newly activated
   fixture file, after validation. A real systemd Caddy reload fails. The seam
   restores those bytes; the adapter restores the prior generation and reloads
   it. Outcome is RolledBack with exactly two reload calls. Health still passes.
3. A real successful reload is followed by an injected lost acknowledgement
   (context deadline error). Outcome is Unknown after exactly one reload call;
   the uncertain manager refuses further use. A fresh observation checks the
   intended generation hashes, and full adapted disk JSON equals live admin
   JSON. The caller reconciles without another mutation or blind retry.
   This acknowledgement loss is injected, not a naturally occurring timeout.
   It proves this caller seam, not durable restart-time apply reconciliation.

The private fixture receipt uses atomic rename plus file/directory sync. It is
not an operation journal, authorization record, lock or production BrineState.

Two full reboot observations
----------------------------
Both preflights found no update process, no held package-manager lock and no
running Brine process. Each recorded three interactive sessions: one operator
SSH session and two local console sessions. The owner had explicitly allowed
the reboot interruption. No individual session was killed or reconfigured.
Exactly two reboots were performed, the maximum authorized by the brief.

External polling waited for a changed boot ID and, BEFORE invoking any Brine
or fixture test process, independently checked the active user unit, direct
expected body and routed expected body using systemctl and curl only.

 Reboot 1: unit active at 26.005415 seconds after boot;
           first independent healthy observation at uptime 26.97 seconds.
 Reboot 2: unit active at 25.599697 seconds after boot;
           first independent healthy observation at uptime 28.17 seconds.

These are measured first-observation upper bounds, not exact HTTP-ready times
or a production performance baseline. Both independent checks passed without
postboot start, restart or daemon reload. The subsequent read-only probe stage
checked the changed boot ID, runtime/secret/environment/admin isolation and
inventory app identity, live port, generation and secret name.

The reboot-tested source was redeployed after the first cleanup, proving
repeatability from the retained empty nonzero Caddy generation. That prepare
included all three failure drills and passed in 38.70 seconds. Its postboot
probe passed in 2.45 seconds; cleanup passed in 3.14 seconds.

Final review found that the probe's log overstated its assertions: it observed
unit hashes and secret IDs but did not compare them with the fixture receipt.
The final helper now checks exact unit name/hash, secret name/ID, Caddy file
name/hash, generation and live port. Synthetic regressions reject each altered
binding. A further real prepare/cleanup cycle, WITHOUT another reboot, verified
the strengthened comparisons against live inventory and repeated all failure
drills: prepare 51.32 seconds, cleanup 7.49 seconds. The helper is shared with
postboot probe, but its extra exact-binding assertions were not rerun across a
reboot because the two-reboot authorization limit had already been reached.

Scrubbed final output excerpts
-----------------------------
 verified immutable multi-platform index and arm64 manifest
 real planner refuses the unowned catch-all; fixture-only route scope does not authorize connected apply
 direct and routed HTTP 200 with expected fixture body
 secret and escaped environment delivered; admin denied via loopback and both aliases
 invalid candidate rejected; prior disk and live route unchanged
 real systemd reload rejected invalid activated fixture config; adapter rolled back and reloaded prior generation
 lost-success acknowledgement injected after real reload; fresh disk and live admin reads reconciled without another mutation
 active_unit_direct_route_pass_without_brine
 live inventory exactly matches recorded unit, secret and Caddy hashes/bindings
 fixture resources removed; enrollment and empty Caddy generation retained
 pinned transport ping and ignored shell-command probe pass; restricted inventory has an empty app set
 fixture_certificate_and_test_binary_removed; no_fixture_listener_or_live_route; empty_generation_and_enrollment_retained

Cleanup and retained state
--------------------------
Cleanup removes the fixture Caddy entry, stops its unit, removes the installed
Quadlet source by exact recorded hash, reloads the user manager, and removes
only its named secret and pinned image. It checks prior-generation bytes and
candidate-root bytes before removing fixture-generated artifacts. The main
Caddyfile hash remains unchanged. Final Podman container/image/secret listings
are empty, there is no fixture listener or live route, and the Caddy tree has
only current plus one empty generation. The private receipt is absent.

Operator cleanup required exactly the three regular, singly linked,
Caddy-owned certificate files in the fixture-local directory before removal.
The shared Caddy internal CA remains shared service state. The lane-installed
root-owned test executable was removed only after its checksum matched the
local executable. No preexisting key material was inspected or deleted.

After cleanup, the real pinned restricted transport passed ping, ignored an
unrelated requested shell command and returned an empty app set and empty
Caddy files through inventory. Existing enrollment and linger remain intact.
P02-07 account-deletion/D7 acceptance comes from the earlier merged enrollment
evidence in the Phase 02 plan, not from deleting the enrolled runner again.

Reproduction entry points (require fresh explicit host authorization)
--------------------------------------------------------------------
Local, no hardware mutation:
 go test ./...
 go vet ./...
 go build -o "$SCRATCH/brine" ./cmd/brine
 go test -tags pi_integration ./integration/...
 go vet -tags pi_integration ./integration/...
 go test -race ./...
 gofmt -l ./cmd ./internal ./integration
 git diff --check

Cross-compile the test executable:
 CGO_ENABLED=0 GOOS=linux GOARCH=arm64 go test -tags pi_integration -c -o "$SCRATCH/pi-fixture.test" ./integration

On a separately authorized, already-enrolled empty fixture host, install that
executable through operator access and invoke as the unprivileged runner:
 pi-fixture.test -test.v -test.run '^TestPiFixture$' -fixture-stage prepare
The prepare stage includes the failure drills. Optional drills reruns those
checks against the existing receipt. Reboot is intentionally an operator
operation, NOT a harness stage. Check update locks/processes and sessions
first; independently inspect recovery before running:
 pi-fixture.test -test.v -test.run '^TestPiFixture$' -fixture-stage probe
 pi-fixture.test -test.v -test.run '^TestPiFixture$' -fixture-stage cleanup

Read-only restricted-client check with private enrollment config:
 go test -tags pi_integration ./integration/... -run TestRestrictedClientAfterCleanup -v -args -fixture-target "$PRIVATE_TARGET_CONFIG"
Never commit the config, receipt, boot IDs, SSH identifiers or raw inventory.
Also remove the checked test executable and fixture-only certificate files.

Acceptance and deferrals
------------------------
T05: real generator/install/start and runtime escaping/secret injection.
T06: independent recovery after two full host reboots.
T11: real route validation/reload, invalid candidate and rollback; injected
     unknown acknowledgement reconciled by fresh read-only observations.
T17: container admin isolation and retained restricted dispatcher access;
     wider enrollment bypass coverage is earlier merged evidence.
This does not claim complete coverage of every scenario in those matrix rows.

Phase 03 must provide the durable operation journal, mutation locks,
restart-time reconciliation, committed ownership/state, authorization and
restricted-dispatcher-driven apply. It must reject unknown image manifests
and must not reuse the fixture-only routing projection. No amd64 deployment,
fresh-package activation, all-users-logged-out recovery, power-loss durability,
production apply, database rollback, Litestream/R2 restore or public TLS was
verified. Database and application rollback remain separate operations.

Review follow-up: exposed versus published ports (2026-10-09)
-----------------------------------------------------------
Podman 5.4 inspect includes image EXPOSE entries with null/empty bindings in
NetworkSettings.Ports. Failing-first regressions reproduced a valid published
loopback port being marked unknown when either unbound shape was also present.
The collector now ignores only entries without host bindings and inspects all
published entries before accepting exactly one loopback TCP binding. Tests
retain multiple-published-port refusal and additionally cover multiple bindings
on one port, only-unbound exposure, UDP/invalid protocols and invalid port
numbers. Wrong-service, stopped-container and off-loopback refusals still pass.

These are representative inspect-output-shape regressions, not a new hardware
capture. No Pi access or harness changes occurred; the previously cleaned,
enrolled host was left untouched. origin/main was merged (already up to date,
no rebase). The targeted regression changed from two failing cases to passing.
Full test/vet/build/race, tagged integration test/vet, formatting and diff checks
passed locally; tagged hardware stages skipped without opt-in, as intended.
